WCP_DOCS.md, before:

## Vaporview WCP Server Usage

The Vaporview extension includes a Waveform Control Protocol (WCP) server so external tools can control the viewer over TCP, following the WCP specification ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)).

This document explains how to enable the server, configure it, and use it from external clients.

---

## Configuration

Vaporview exposes a small set of settings under the `vaporview` configuration section.

- **`vaporview.wcp.enabled`**  
  - **Type**: boolean  
  - **Default**: `false`  
  - **Behavior**:  
    - When `true`, the WCP server is started automatically when the extension is activated (VS Code startup or first use of Vaporview).
    - When `false`, the server is not started automatically; you can still start it manually via commands.

- **`vaporview.wcp.port`**  
  - **Type**: number  
  - **Default**: `54322`  
  - **Range**: `0`–`65535`  
  - **Behavior**:  
    - **0**: Ask the OS to auto-assign an available port.  
    - **Non-zero**: Use the specified TCP port.  
    - If the port is already in use, the server will fail to start and an error will be logged to the Vaporview output channel.

You can edit these settings via:

- VS Code Settings UI:  
  - Open Settings → search for **“vaporview wcp”**.
- `settings.json`:

```json
"vaporview.wcp.enabled": true,
"vaporview.wcp.port": 54322
```

---

## Starting and Stopping the Server

There are three commands exposed by the extension for controlling the WCP server:

- **`vaporview.wcp.start`**  
  - Starts the WCP server if it is not already running.  
  - Uses the value of `vaporview.wcp.port` (default `54322`, `0` for auto-assign).  
  - Shows a notification with the actual port in use.  
  - If the server cannot be started (e.g., port in use), an error message is shown.

- **`vaporview.wcp.stop`**  
  - Stops the server if it is running.  
  - Shows a notification when the server is stopped.

- **`vaporview.wcp.status`**  
  - Shows the current state of the server:  
    - If running: the TCP port and the number of active connections.  
    - If not running: a simple “not running” message.

These commands can be run from:

- The Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` / `Cmd+Shift+P` → search for **“WCP:”**).  
- Keybindings or custom commands that you define yourself.

---

## When the Server Starts

The server is created and managed by the extension (`src/extension_core/extension.ts`):

- On activation:
  - The extension reads `vaporview.wcp.enabled` and `vaporview.wcp.port`.
  - If `vaporview.wcp.enabled` is `true`, it creates a `WCPServer` instance and calls `start()`.
- On configuration change:
  - If you toggle `vaporview.wcp.enabled` or change `vaporview.wcp.port`, the extension will:
    - Start the server if it was disabled and is now enabled.
    - Stop the server if it was enabled and is now disabled.
    - Restart the server if it is enabled and the port value changes.
- On extension shutdown:
  - The server is stopped as part of the normal VS Code disposal process.

Internally, the server listens only on `127.0.0.1` (loopback) and accepts multiple TCP clients. It keeps track of active connections and exposes this count to the `vaporview.wcp.status` command.

---

## Protocol Overview

The server implements the **Waveform Control Protocol (WCP)** as defined in the reference project:  
[https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)

- **Transport**:  
  - TCP, JSON messages separated by newline (`\n`).
- **Message format**:  
  - Requests are objects with at least `method` and `id` (and optional `params`).  
  - Responses include either a `result` field (on success) or an `error` field (on failure), plus the original `id`.

Example request:

```json
{"method": "greeting", "params": {}, "id": 1}
```

Example response:

```json
{
  "result": {
    "name": "VaporView",
    "version": "X.Y.Z",
    "protocol": "WCP",
    "protocol_version": "0",
    "capabilities": ["greeting", "get_item_list", "..."]
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

The exact command set and semantics follow the WCP specification where possible. Some commands are specific to Vaporview (e.g., `open_document`, `add_signal`) but still use the same JSON-RPC-like pattern.

---

## Basic Usage from a Client

1. **Start the WCP server**
   - Ensure VS Code with the Vaporview extension is running.  
   - Either:
     - Set `vaporview.wcp.enabled = true` (auto-start on activation), or  
     - Run `vaporview.wcp.start` from the Command Palette.

2. **Determine the port**
   - If you use a fixed port (e.g., `54322`), connect directly to that.  
   - If you set `vaporview.wcp.port = 0`, retrieve the actual port using:
     - The notification shown when the server starts.  
     - The `vaporview.wcp.status` command.

3. **Connect from your client**
   - Open a TCP connection to `127.0.0.1:<port>`.  
   - Send newline-delimited JSON WCP requests.  
   - Read newline-delimited JSON responses.

4. **Typical command sequence**
   - `greeting` – discover capabilities and verify connectivity.  
   - `open_document` or `load` – open a waveform file (responds immediately with `ack`, then sends `waveform_loaded` event when loading completes).
   - Wait for `waveform_loaded` event before proceeding with other commands.
   - `add_items` / `add_signal` – add signals to the viewer.
   - `get_item_list`, `get_item_info`, `focus_item`, `set_viewport_to`, etc.

For a full list of commands and expected parameters/results, see the server implementation in `src/extension_core/wcp_server.ts` and the WCP specification ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)).

---

## Troubleshooting

- **Server fails to start (port in use)**  
  - Choose a different `vaporview.wcp.port` or set it to `0` to let the OS pick an available port.

- **Client cannot connect**  
  - Confirm the server is running via `vaporview.wcp.status`.  
  - Check that you are connecting to `127.0.0.1` and the correct port.

- **Commands return errors**  
  - The `error` object in the response includes a code and message.  
  - Common causes include invalid parameters (e.g., unknown netlist ID, out-of-range time).

---

## Differences from the WCP Reference Specification

Vaporview aims to follow the WCP specification as defined in the reference project ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)), but there are a few intentional behavior differences and extensions:

- **Document selection via `uri` parameter (all commands)**  
  - Every WCP command in Vaporview accepts an **optional** `uri` parameter in `params`.  
  - If `uri` is provided, the command targets that specific document.  
  - If `uri` is omitted, Vaporview applies the command to the **active document**, or if none is active, the **last active document**.  
  - This is an extension to the spec to better fit VS Code’s multi-document model.

- **Use of `netlist_id` as Displayed Item Reference**  
  - Vaporview uses its internal `netlist_id` as the WCP “displayed item” identifier.  
  - Anywhere the WCP spec refers to an item ID (e.g., in `get_item_info`, `get_item_list`, `set_item_color`, `focus_item`, etc.), Vaporview uses `netlist_id` values that come from its netlist table.

- **`add_items` return behavior**  
  - In the reference spec, `add_items` may return IDs of added items and can report errors for items that could not be added.  
  - In Vaporview:
    - `add_items` **does not return an error** if no items were added (e.g., nothing matched or all items were skipped). It still returns a successful response.  
    - On success, `add_items` **always returns**:
      - `{"ids": []}`  
      even if items were actually added in the viewer. The command is effectively "fire and forget" from the client's perspective.

- **`waveform_loaded` event for `load`, `reload`, and `open_document`**
  - Per the WCP specification, the `load` command responds instantly with `ack` if the file is found, and sends a `waveform_loaded` event when loading completes.
  - Vaporview implements this behavior for `load`, `reload`, and `open_document` commands.
  - Clients should listen for the `waveform_loaded` event before sending these commands to avoid race conditions.

These differences should be kept in mind when using generic WCP clients or comparing behavior against the reference implementation described in the WCP project ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)).

---

## Vaporview-Specific Commands

In addition to the standard WCP methods described in the reference project ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)), the Vaporview server exposes several **Vaporview-specific** commands. Many of these correspond directly to VS Code API commands described in `API_DOCS.md` (for example, `vaporview.openFile`, `waveformViewer.addVariable`, `waveformViewer.removeVariable`, and others).

- **`get_capabilities`**  
  - Returns a list of all supported server capabilities (both standard WCP and Vaporview-specific methods).  
  - Clients should use this to discover which methods are available in the running server.

- **`open_document`**  
  - Convenience wrapper to open a waveform file in Vaporview.  
  - Internally maps to the `vaporview.openFile` command and supports options like `uri`, `load_all`, and `max_signals`.  
  - Returns a WCP-style ack object including the document `uri` **immediately** if the file is found.
  - Sends a `waveform_loaded` event to all connected clients when the document is fully loaded.

- **`add_signal`**  
  - Adds a single signal to the viewer using either `netlist_id`, `instance_path`, or `scope_path + name`.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.addVariable`.  
  - Returns `{ "success": true }` on success (or an error response on failure).

- **`remove_signal`**  
  - Removes a single signal from the viewer; accepts the same selectors as `add_signal`.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.removeVariable`.  
  - Returns `{ "success": true }` when the removal command is issued successfully.

- **`set_marker`**  
  - Sets the main or alternate marker in the viewer at a given time (optionally with units) and marker type (`0` main, `1` alt).  
  - Internally maps to the `waveformViewer.setMarker` command.

- **`get_marker`**  
  - Reads back the current marker time and units for either the main or alternate marker.  
  - Internally uses `waveformViewer.getViewerState` and translates the result into the WCP `get_marker` response shape.

- **`get_viewer_state`**  
  - Returns a snapshot of the viewer state (URI, marker times, time unit, zoom ratio, scroll position, and displayed signals).  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.getViewerState` and converts the result into the WCP-style response.

- **`get_values_at_time`**  
  - Returns the values of one or more signals (specified by `instance_paths`) at a given time.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.getValuesAtTime`, then adapts the return value to the WCP `get_values_at_time` result format (list of `{instance_path, value}`).

- **`get_open_documents`**  
  - Lists all open Vaporview documents and the last active document.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.getOpenDocuments` and converts the resulting URIs into strings for WCP clients.

All of these Vaporview-specific WCP methods follow the same transport and request/response structure as the standard WCP commands and respect the optional `uri` parameter described above.

---

## Events

The WCP server broadcasts events to all connected clients. Events are JSON messages with `type: "event"` and do not have an `id` field (unlike command responses).

### `waveform_loaded` Event

The `waveform_loaded` event is sent when a waveform document finishes loading. This event is fired by the following commands:

- **`load`** – After the waveform file is fully loaded
- **`reload`** – After the document is reloaded and ready
- **`open_document`** – After the waveform file is fully loaded

**Event Format:**
```json
{
  "type": "event",
  "event": "waveform_loaded",
  "uri": "file:///path/to/waveform.vcd"
}
```

**Important Notes:**
- The `load`, `reload`, and `open_document` commands return an `ack` response **immediately** if the file is found (per WCP specification).
- The `waveform_loaded` event is sent **asynchronously** when loading completes.
- Clients should set up event listeners **before** sending these commands to avoid missing the event due to race conditions.
- The event includes the `uri` field, which matches the URI from the `ack` response (normalized by the server).
- Clients can filter events by URI to wait for a specific document to load.

Commit message:

wcp: send 'waveform_loaded' with the exact same uri that sent in the command 'load', 'reload', 'open_document'

WCP_DOCS.md, after:

## Vaporview WCP Server Usage

The Vaporview extension includes a Waveform Control Protocol (WCP) server so external tools can control the viewer over TCP, following the WCP specification ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)).

This document explains how to enable the server, configure it, and use it from external clients.

---

## Configuration

Vaporview exposes a small set of settings under the `vaporview` configuration section.

- **`vaporview.wcp.enabled`**  
  - **Type**: boolean  
  - **Default**: `false`  
  - **Behavior**:  
    - When `true`, the WCP server is started automatically when the extension is activated (VS Code startup or first use of Vaporview).
    - When `false`, the server is not started automatically; you can still start it manually via commands.

- **`vaporview.wcp.port`**  
  - **Type**: number  
  - **Default**: `54322`  
  - **Range**: `0`–`65535`  
  - **Behavior**:  
    - **0**: Ask the OS to auto-assign an available port.  
    - **Non-zero**: Use the specified TCP port.  
    - If the port is already in use, the server will fail to start and an error will be logged to the Vaporview output channel.

You can edit these settings via:

- VS Code Settings UI:  
  - Open Settings → search for **“vaporview wcp”**.
- `settings.json`:

```json
"vaporview.wcp.enabled": true,
"vaporview.wcp.port": 54322
```

---

## Starting and Stopping the Server

There are three commands exposed by the extension for controlling the WCP server:

- **`vaporview.wcp.start`**  
  - Starts the WCP server if it is not already running.  
  - Uses the value of `vaporview.wcp.port` (default `54322`, `0` for auto-assign).  
  - Shows a notification with the actual port in use.  
  - If the server cannot be started (e.g., port in use), an error message is shown.

- **`vaporview.wcp.stop`**  
  - Stops the server if it is running.  
  - Shows a notification when the server is stopped.

- **`vaporview.wcp.status`**  
  - Shows the current state of the server:  
    - If running: the TCP port and the number of active connections.  
    - If not running: a simple “not running” message.

These commands can be run from:

- The Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` / `Cmd+Shift+P` → search for **“WCP:”**).  
- Keybindings or custom commands that you define yourself.

---

## When the Server Starts

The server is created and managed by the extension (`src/extension_core/extension.ts`):

- On activation:
  - The extension reads `vaporview.wcp.enabled` and `vaporview.wcp.port`.
  - If `vaporview.wcp.enabled` is `true`, it creates a `WCPServer` instance and calls `start()`.
- On configuration change:
  - If you toggle `vaporview.wcp.enabled` or change `vaporview.wcp.port`, the extension will:
    - Start the server if it was disabled and is now enabled.
    - Stop the server if it was enabled and is now disabled.
    - Restart the server if it is enabled and the port value changes.
- On extension shutdown:
  - The server is stopped as part of the normal VS Code disposal process.

Internally, the server listens only on `127.0.0.1` (loopback) and accepts multiple TCP clients. It keeps track of active connections and exposes this count to the `vaporview.wcp.status` command.

---

## Protocol Overview

The server implements the **Waveform Control Protocol (WCP)** as defined in the reference project:  
[https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)

- **Transport**:  
  - TCP, JSON messages separated by newline (`\n`).
- **Message format**:  
  - Requests are objects with at least `method` and `id` (and optional `params`).  
  - Responses include either a `result` field (on success) or an `error` field (on failure), plus the original `id`.

Example request:

```json
{"method": "greeting", "params": {}, "id": 1}
```

Example response:

```json
{
  "result": {
    "name": "VaporView",
    "version": "X.Y.Z",
    "protocol": "WCP",
    "protocol_version": "0",
    "capabilities": ["greeting", "get_item_list", "..."]
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

The exact command set and semantics follow the WCP specification where possible. Some commands are specific to Vaporview (e.g., `open_document`, `add_signal`) but still use the same JSON-RPC-like pattern.

---

## Basic Usage from a Client

1. **Start the WCP server**
   - Ensure VS Code with the Vaporview extension is running.  
   - Either:
     - Set `vaporview.wcp.enabled = true` (auto-start on activation), or  
     - Run `vaporview.wcp.start` from the Command Palette.

2. **Determine the port**
   - If you use a fixed port (e.g., `54322`), connect directly to that.  
   - If you set `vaporview.wcp.port = 0`, retrieve the actual port using:
     - The notification shown when the server starts.  
     - The `vaporview.wcp.status` command.

3. **Connect from your client**
   - Open a TCP connection to `127.0.0.1:<port>`.  
   - Send newline-delimited JSON WCP requests.  
   - Read newline-delimited JSON responses.

4. **Typical command sequence**
   - `greeting` – discover capabilities and verify connectivity.  
   - `open_document` or `load` – open a waveform file (responds immediately with `ack`, then sends `waveform_loaded` event when loading completes).
   - Wait for `waveform_loaded` event before proceeding with other commands.
   - `add_items` / `add_signal` – add signals to the viewer.
   - `get_item_list`, `get_item_info`, `focus_item`, `set_viewport_to`, etc.

For a full list of commands and expected parameters/results, see the server implementation in `src/extension_core/wcp_server.ts` and the WCP specification ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)).

---

## Troubleshooting

- **Server fails to start (port in use)**  
  - Choose a different `vaporview.wcp.port` or set it to `0` to let the OS pick an available port.

- **Client cannot connect**  
  - Confirm the server is running via `vaporview.wcp.status`.  
  - Check that you are connecting to `127.0.0.1` and the correct port.

- **Commands return errors**  
  - The `error` object in the response includes a code and message.  
  - Common causes include invalid parameters (e.g., unknown netlist ID, out-of-range time).

---

## Differences from the WCP Reference Specification

Vaporview aims to follow the WCP specification as defined in the reference project ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)), but there are a few intentional behavior differences and extensions:

- **Document selection via `uri` parameter (all commands)**  
  - Every WCP command in Vaporview accepts an **optional** `uri` parameter in `params`.  
  - If `uri` is provided, the command targets that specific document.  
  - If `uri` is omitted, Vaporview applies the command to the **active document**, or if none is active, the **last active document**.  
  - This is an extension to the spec to better fit VS Code’s multi-document model.

- **Use of `netlist_id` as Displayed Item Reference**  
  - Vaporview uses its internal `netlist_id` as the WCP “displayed item” identifier.  
  - Anywhere the WCP spec refers to an item ID (e.g., in `get_item_info`, `get_item_list`, `set_item_color`, `focus_item`, etc.), Vaporview uses `netlist_id` values that come from its netlist table.

- **`add_items` return behavior**  
  - In the reference spec, `add_items` may return IDs of added items and can report errors for items that could not be added.  
  - In Vaporview:
    - `add_items` **does not return an error** if no items were added (e.g., nothing matched or all items were skipped). It still returns a successful response.  
    - On success, `add_items` **always returns**:
      - `{"ids": []}`  
      even if items were actually added in the viewer. The command is effectively "fire and forget" from the client's perspective.

- **`waveform_loaded` event for `load`, `reload`, and `open_document`**
  - Per the WCP specification, the `load` command responds instantly with `ack` if the file is found, and sends a `waveform_loaded` event when loading completes.
  - Vaporview implements this behavior for `load`, `reload`, and `open_document` commands.
  - The server preserves the **exact URI format** from the input parameter in both the `ack` response and the `waveform_loaded` event.
  - Clients should listen for the `waveform_loaded` event **before** sending these commands to avoid race conditions, and wait for the **exact URI** they sent in the command.

These differences should be kept in mind when using generic WCP clients or comparing behavior against the reference implementation described in the WCP project ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)).

---

## Vaporview-Specific Commands

In addition to the standard WCP methods described in the reference project ([wcp on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/waveform-control-protocol/wcp)), the Vaporview server exposes several **Vaporview-specific** commands. Many of these correspond directly to VS Code API commands described in `API_DOCS.md` (for example, `vaporview.openFile`, `waveformViewer.addVariable`, `waveformViewer.removeVariable`, and others).

- **`get_capabilities`**  
  - Returns a list of all supported server capabilities (both standard WCP and Vaporview-specific methods).  
  - Clients should use this to discover which methods are available in the running server.

- **`open_document`**  
  - Convenience wrapper to open a waveform file in Vaporview.  
  - Internally maps to the `vaporview.openFile` command and supports options like `uri`, `load_all`, and `max_signals`.  
  - Returns a WCP-style ack object including the document `uri` **immediately** if the file is found.  
  - The `uri` in the ack response uses the **exact same format** as the `uri` parameter in the request.  
  - Sends a `waveform_loaded` event to all connected clients when the document is fully loaded, using the same URI format as the input.

- **`add_signal`**  
  - Adds a single signal to the viewer using either `netlist_id`, `instance_path`, or `scope_path + name`.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.addVariable`.  
  - Returns `{ "success": true }` on success (or an error response on failure).

- **`remove_signal`**  
  - Removes a single signal from the viewer; accepts the same selectors as `add_signal`.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.removeVariable`.  
  - Returns `{ "success": true }` when the removal command is issued successfully.

- **`set_marker`**  
  - Sets the main or alternate marker in the viewer at a given time (optionally with units) and marker type (`0` main, `1` alt).  
  - Internally maps to the `waveformViewer.setMarker` command.

- **`get_marker`**  
  - Reads back the current marker time and units for either the main or alternate marker.  
  - Internally uses `waveformViewer.getViewerState` and translates the result into the WCP `get_marker` response shape.

- **`get_viewer_state`**  
  - Returns a snapshot of the viewer state (URI, marker times, time unit, zoom ratio, scroll position, and displayed signals).  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.getViewerState` and converts the result into the WCP-style response.

- **`get_values_at_time`**  
  - Returns the values of one or more signals (specified by `instance_paths`) at a given time.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.getValuesAtTime`, then adapts the return value to the WCP `get_values_at_time` result format (list of `{instance_path, value}`).

- **`get_open_documents`**  
  - Lists all open Vaporview documents and the last active document.  
  - Internally maps to `waveformViewer.getOpenDocuments` and converts the resulting URIs into strings for WCP clients.

All of these Vaporview-specific WCP methods follow the same transport and request/response structure as the standard WCP commands and respect the optional `uri` parameter described above.

---

## Events

The WCP server broadcasts events to all connected clients. Events are JSON messages with `type: "event"` and do not have an `id` field (unlike command responses).

### `waveform_loaded` Event

The `waveform_loaded` event is sent when a waveform document finishes loading. This event is fired by the following commands:

- **`load`** – After the waveform file is fully loaded
- **`reload`** – After the document is reloaded and ready
- **`open_document`** – After the waveform file is fully loaded

**Event Format:**
```json
{
  "type": "event",
  "event": "waveform_loaded",
  "uri": "file:///path/to/waveform.vcd"
}
```

**Important Notes:**
- The `load`, `reload`, and `open_document` commands return an `ack` response **immediately** if the file is found (per WCP specification).
- The `waveform_loaded` event is sent **asynchronously** when loading completes.
- Clients should set up event listeners **before** sending these commands to avoid missing the event due to race conditions.
- The server **preserves the exact URI format** from the input parameter. The `uri` field in both the `ack` response and the `waveform_loaded` event will match the URI format that was sent in the command.
- Clients should wait for the **exact URI** they sent in the command (e.g., if you send `/path/to/file.vcd`, wait for `/path/to/file.vcd`; if you send `file:///path/to/file.vcd`, wait for `file:///path/to/file.vcd`).
- Clients can filter events by URI to wait for a specific document to load.
